---
title: extern "C" - what does it exactly do?
date: 2022-05-16 18:50:00
tags: [compiler]
---

About 9 years ago I was trying to make games with C++. I used [Lua](https://tylerneylon.com/a/learn-lua/) for scripts.
It was shipped as a package containing a static library (`lua.lib` for Windows) and header files.
Since Lua is written in C and `lua.lib` was compiled with a C compiler, I needed to include the headers this way:
```c++
extern "C" {
#include <lua.h>
#include <lualib.h>
#include <lauxlib.h>
}
```

At that time I didn't have a clue what it would mean at all.
Of course, after some time I learned that it's about functions overloading. The compiler needs to distinguish
overloaded functions between each other.

There is no function overloading in C, so the object file gets the "pure" name of the function.
While using the C++ compiler, the object file gets the "mangled" name of the function.
There is [name mangling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Name_mangling#How_different_compilers_mangle_the_same_functions)
in C++.
```
void hello(int, char) -> hello (in C)
void hello(int, char) -> _Z1helloic (in C++)
```

The `extern "C"` expression is needed to declare that all functions and variables declared in its scope
should have the "pure" name in the object file. In essense, it's needed to make inter-operability between C++
and C code possible. [Link to godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/sjvYPqo9a). It's a hint to the linker that you want
to call a C function from a C++ code.

But what's about the code inside the `extern "C"`? Is it being compiled **as C++ code or as C code**?
The belief that "C is a subset of C++" is wrong: the two languages are evolving independently.
C has features that C++ doesn't have, for example [VLA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-length_array).

The C++ Standard shows examples where the code inside `extern "C"` is compiled as C++ code:
[\[dcl.link\]](http://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.link#example-3) (there are classes).

Inspecting the source code of a compiler, it becomes clear that we compile **C++ code** inside `extern "C"`,
and the only thing that changes is the flag about mangling the name: [Clang's source code](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/d5248a46faed9071adffc65f82cac9bc0769b882/clang/lib/AST/ItaniumMangle.cpp#L738-L740).

The conclusion: header files of a C library should be simple enough, so that both C and C++ compilers could
compile them in the same way.
