---
title: Helping the compiler with [[assume]]
date: 2022-12-30 09:01:00
tags: [compiler, madskillz]
categories: [Articles]
---

I wrote once about `std::unreachable` (aka `__builtin_unreachable` before C++23): [link to the post](/posts/std-unreachable).

This command tells the compiler that the program
will never get into this branch of execution (the programmer absolutely guarantees it), so the compiler may optimize this place
knowing that.

A similar functionality was standardized in C++23: the [\[\[assume(expr)\]\]](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/attributes/assume) attribute 
(aka `__builtin_assume` before C++23).

This thing tells the compiler that in this point of the program the `expr` expression should be considered equal to `true`,
so that the compiler may make various optimizations based on this data.
The `expr` expression will not be evaluated while the program is running, this is a compile-time hint.

There is little information on cppreference (the link above), so it is better to read the proposal: [https://wg21.link/p1774r8](https://wg21.link/p1774r8).

The simplest example is a method that divides a number by 32:
```c++
int div32(int x) {
    return x / 32;
}
```
An obvious optimization is not to divide by 32, but to make a bit shift by 5 bits, right?
```c++
int div32(int x) {
    return x >> 5;
}
```
But it will not work correctly on negative numbers!
The compiler should always take into account negative numbers, and because of this, the method is larger in size:
[link to godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/hcfnbhvE6).

If the programmer knows for sure that all numbers are going to be non-negative, then they need to do this:
```c++
int div32_2(int x) {
    [[assume(x >= 0)]]; // or __builtin_assume(x >= 0);
    return x / 32;
}
```
And then the code is optimized: [link to godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/rddvb39bP).

In more complex examples, which are demonstrated in the proposal,
it is possible to greatly reduce the number of assembler instructions, especially in computational programs.

Some `assume`s can be made common in the standard library
(there is an example with smart pointers in the proposal),
but in general this is a functionality for a narrow set of developers. There are several things needed to keep in mind:
1. You really need to depend a lot on the speed of the code,
for example, if you developing realtime programs. I once [posted a video by Timur Dumler](/posts/need-for-speed)
(by the way he is the author of the "proposal") on this topic.
2. You need to understand how the instructions are going to be cut off.
Example of a program that clarifies array values via [std::clamp](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/clamp):
```c++
void limiter(float* data, size_t size) {
    [[assume(size > 0)]];
    [[assume(size % 32 == 0)]];
    for (size_t i = 0; i < size; ++i) {
        [[assume(std::isfinite(data[i]))]];
        data[i] = std::clamp(data[i], -1.0f, 1.0f);
    }
}
```
Assuming that the buffer size is always greater than 0 and a multiple of 32, and the floats are normalized, the programmer puts `assume`s.
The first and third `assume` does not allow you the compiler to generate unnecessary checks,
and the second `assume` is probably somehow connected with the processor cache line size.
3. You need to constantly go into the assembler of a compiled program and check whether the `assume`s did what you wanted.
You even may need to write unit tests on the generated assembler (I would write it).
After all, C++ compilers have a lot of tests checking the resulting assembler, so similar tests are needed for individual programs with `assume`s.
4. The standard notes that compilers are free to optimize the code as they want,
no requirements are imposed on them.
So it is necessary to check how a separate compiler and even a separate version works on your `assume`s.
For preserving the behaviour we can use unit tests (described in the 3rd paragraph).

We can make some fun things with `assume`s ðŸ˜
- Fixing the `switch` - [link to godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/3EbWW1o65).
- Solving simple equations for value - [link to godbolt](https://godbolt.org/z/jod1Exqxh).
